Introduction to Economics  
Chapter 1: Basics of Economics
Learning intentions 
• Define ‘Economics’. 
• Explain the fundamental economic problem of scarcity 
(because resources are scarce while people’s wants (not 
needs) are unlimited)., 
• Explain the need for individuals, ﬁrms and governments to 
make choices (due to scarcity of resources). 
• Define opportunity cost and explain how it results from the 
need to make choices. 
• Explain the basic questions of resource allocation.
Introduction 
 
 
 
Have you ever heard anything about Economics?
Introduction 
• Have you ever heard anything about Economics?   
• It is obvious you heard about economics and even you talked 
a lot about economics in your day to day activities. 
• you may have questions such as:  
– What are resources?  
– What does efficient allocation mean?  
– What are human needs?  
– What does demand mean?  
– What is economics?  
– etc…
Introduction 
• This course will answer those questions and 
introduce you to  
– the nature of economics, 
– demand and supply theories, 
– theory of consumer,  
– theory of production,  
– theory of cost, 
–  theory of market structure and  
– fundamental concepts of macroeconomics at large.
Chapter objectives 
• After successful completion of this chapter, you will 
be able to: 
– understand the concept and nature of economics; 
– analyze how resources are efficiently used in producing 
output; 
– identify the different methods of economic analysis ; 
– distinguish and appreciate the different economic 
systems; 
– understand the basic economic problems and how they 
can be solved; and 
– identify the different decision making units and how they 
interact with each other.
1.1 Definition of economics 
• Economics is one of the most exciting disciplines in social 
sciences. 
• The word economy comes from the Greek phrase “one 
who manages a household”. 
• The science of economics in its current form is about two 
hundred years old. 
• Adam Smith – generally known as the father of economics 
– brought out his famous book, “An Inquiry into the 
Nature and Causes of Wealth of Nations”‖, in the year 
1776.  
• Though many other writers expressed important 
economic ideas before Adam Smith, economics as a 
distinct subject started with his book.
1.1 Definition of economics 
• There is no universally accepted definition of 
economics. This is because different economists 
defined economics from different perspectives: 
a. Wealth definition, 
b. Welfare definition, 
c. Scarcity definition, and 
d. Growth definition 
• Hence, its definition varies as the nature and 
scope of the subject grow over time. But, the 
formal and commonly accepted definition is as 
follow.
1.1 Definition of economics 
 • Economics is a social science which studies 
about efficient allocation of scarce resources 
so as to attain the maximum fulfillment of 
unlimited human wants. 
•  As economics is a science of choice, it studies 
how people choose to use scarce or limited 
productive resources (land, labor, equipment, 
technical knowledge and the like) to produce 
various commodities.
1.1 Definition of economics 
 • The following statements are derived from the 
above definition. 
– Economics studies about scarce resources; 
– It studies about allocation of resources; 
– Allocation should be efficient; 
– Human wants are unlimited 
– The aim of economics is to study how to satisfy 
the unlimited human wants up to the maximum 
possible degree by allocating the resources 
efficiently.
1.1 Definition of economics 
 • The ‘social’ aspect is because economics looks at 
human behavior, particularly in relation to satisfying 
human needs and wants.  
• Economics is also a ‘science’. This is because of the 
way that economists put forward and investigate 
theories in the same way as scientists.  
 
Figure 1.1: Economics as a science
1.2 The rationales of economics 
  There are two fundamental facts that provide 
the foundation for the field of economics. 
1. Human (society‘s) material wants are unlimited. 
2. Economic resources are limited (scarce). 
 The basic economic problem is about scarcity 
and choice since there are only limited 
amount of resources available to produce the 
unlimited amount of goods and services we 
desire.
1.2 The rationales of economics 
  Thus, economics is the study of how human 
beings make choices to use scarce resources 
as they seek to satisfy their unlimited wants. 
Therefore, choice is at the heart of all 
decision-making.  
 As an individual, family, and nation, we 
confront difficult choices about how to use 
limited resources to meet our needs and 
wants.
1.2 The rationales of economics 
  Economists  
 study how these choices are made in 
various settings;  
 evaluate the outcomes in terms of criteria 
such as efficiency, equity, and stability; and 
  search for alternative forms of economic 
organization that might produce higher 
living standards or a more desirable 
distribution of material well-being.
1.3.1 Scope of Economics 
 The field and scope of economics is expanding 
rapidly and has come to include a vast range of 
topics and issues.  
 In the recent past, many new branches of the subject 
have developed, including development economics, 
industrial economics, transport economics, welfare 
economics, environmental economics, and so on. 
 However, the core of modern economics is formed 
by its two major branches: microeconomics and 
macroeconomics.
1.3.1 Scope of Economics 
 The field and scope of economics is expanding 
rapidly and has come to include a vast range of 
topics and issues.  
 In the recent past, many new branches of the subject 
have developed, including development economics, 
industrial economics, transport economics, welfare 
economics, environmental economics, and so on. 
 However, the core of modern economics is formed 
by its two major branches: microeconomics and 
macroeconomics.
Branches of Economics 
Microeconomics 
 a branch of economics that is 
concerned with the analysis of 
individual parts of the economy.  
 looks into economic behavior of 
individual decision making units 
such as households, firms, 
markets and industries. 
Eg. factors determining the behaviour of 
a consumer/a firm, the demand for/the 
supply of a good, the price of a good, the 
quantity of a good, the performance of a 
market, etc.  
 
 
Macroeconomics  
 a branch of economics that is 
concerned with the analysis of 
the whole economy/looks at the 
big picture of the economy.  
 deals with the effects and 
consequences of the aggregate 
behavior of all decision making 
units in a certain economy.  
Eg. factors determining aggregate 
variables such as aggregate demand, 
aggregate supply, national output, 
unemployment, inflation, the balance of 
payments, etc.
1.3.2 Positive versus Normative Analysis 
 
Positive economics 
 
• concerned with analysis of facts 
and is  verifiable.  It doesn’t have 
to be necessarily true.  
• attempts to describe the world as 
it is and answer the questions 
what was; what is; what will be? 
• Disagreement over positive 
economics can be settled by an 
appeal to facts.  
 
 
Normative economics 
 
• A matter of opinion / value 
judgments. It can be true or false, 
but can not be tested. 
• It tells us what should be/what 
ought to be?  
• It evaluates the desirability of 
alternative outcomes based on 
one‘s value judgments about 
what is good or what is bad. 
• Deciding what is good or bad 
policy is not just a matter of 
science. It also involves our views 
on ethics, religion, and political 
philosophy.
1.3.2 Positive versus Normative Analysis 
Examples 
• “Inflation is rising in Ethiopia.” 
• “Welfare programs reduce the 
incentive for people to work” 
• Raising taxes on the wealthy 
slows economic growth. 
• “A decrease in personal income 
tax will lead to a rise in 
unemployment.” 
The above statement is a positive 
statement as it is verifiable (both 
personal income tax and 
unemployment are measurable) 
 
• “Paying people who do not work 
is wrong and unfair.” 
• The government should raise 
taxes on the wealthy to pay for 
helping the poor.”  
• “A redistribution of income from 
the rich to the poor will increase 
social welfare.” 
It is a normative statement as it is 
not verifiable (Though redistribution 
of income is measurable, social 
welfare is not).
1.3.2 Positive versus Normative Analysis 
Exercise: Write 5 Positive statements and 5 
Normative Statements
1.3.3 Inductive and Deductive 
reasoning in economics 
– The fundamental objective of economics, like any 
science, is the establishment of valid 
generalizations about certain aspects of human 
behavior. 
– Those generalizations are known as theories. 
– A theory is a simplified picture of reality. 
– Economic theory provides the basis for economic 
analysis which uses logical reasoning. There are 
two methods of logical reasoning: inductive and 
deductive.
1.3.3 Inductive and Deductive reasoning in 
economics 
An economic theory derives laws/generalizations 
through two methods: 
 
1. Inductive Method/Empirical method (bottom-
up approach) 
– Logical method of reaching at a correct general 
statement or theory based on several independent and 
specific correct statements. / deriving a principle or 
theory by moving from facts to theories and from 
particular to general economic analysis. 
Eg. Formulation of the generalization of diminishing returns. 
     The Malthusian theory of population - human population grows 
more rapidly than the food supply until famines, war or disease 
reduces the population.
1.3.3 Inductive and Deductive 
reasoning in economics 
• Inductive method involves the following 
steps. 
1.  Selecting problem for analysis 
2. Collection, classification, and analysis of data 
3.  Establishing cause and effect relationship 
between economic phenomena.
1.3.3 Inductive and Deductive 
reasoning in economics 
 
2. Deductive Method (top-down approach) 
– Logical way of arriving at a particular/specific correct 
statement starting from a correct general statement.  
– It deals with conclusions about economic phenomenon 
from certain fundamental assumptions or truths or 
axioms through a process of logical arguments. 
Eg. any supply and demand analysis you do is the application of 
generally accepted principles about demand and about supply 
 
Both methods have weaknesses, so we cannot rely 
exclusively in one method. They are complementary.
1.3.3 Inductive and Deductive 
reasoning in economics 
• Major steps in the deductive approach 
include: 
1. Problem identification 
2. Specification of the assumptions 
3.  Formulating hypotheses 
4. Testing the validity of the hypotheses
1.4  Scarcity, Choice, Opportunity cost and 
Production Possibilities Frontier(PPF) 
 
1. Have you ever faced a problem of choice 
among different alternatives? If yes, what 
was your decision? 
2. What is scarcity? Do you think that it is 
different from shortage? Why?
1.4.1  Scarcity 
 The fundamental economic problem that any 
human society faces is the problem of scarcity. 
 Scarcity refers to the fact that all economic 
resources that a society needs to produce goods 
and services are finite or limited in supply. 
 But their being limited should be expressed in 
relation to human wants. 
 Thus, the term scarcity reflects the imbalance 
between our wants and the means to satisfy those 
wants.
1.4.1  Scarcity 
 It is the excess of wants resulting from having 
limited resources (land, labor, capital and 
entrepreneurs) in satisfying the endless wants of 
people.  
 It is a universal problem for societies – it is not 
limited to poor countries.  
 To the economist, all goods and services that have 
a price are relatively scarce.  This means that they 
are scarce relative to people’s demand for them.
Resources 
1.  Free resources: A resource is said to be free if 
the amount available to a society is greater than 
the amount people desire at zero price. E.g. 
sunshine 
2. Scarce (economic) resources: A resource is said to 
be scarce or economic resource when the 
amount available to a society is less than what 
people want to have at zero price.
Examples of scarce resources. 
 All types of human resources: manual, intellectual, 
skilled and specialized labor; 
 Most natural resources like land (especially, fertile 
land), minerals, clean water, forests and wild - 
animals; 
 All types of capital resources ( like machines, 
intermediate goods, infrastructure ); and 
 All types of entrepreneurial resources.
Economic resources 
 Economic resources are usually classified into four 
categories. 
1. Labor: refers to the physical as well as mental 
efforts of human beings used in the production 
and distribution of goods and services. The 
reward for labor is called wage. 
2. Land: refers to the natural resources or all the 
free gifts of nature usable in the production of 
goods and services. The reward for the services 
of land is known as rent.
Economic resources 
3. Capital: refers to all the manufactured inputs that 
can be used to produce other goods and services. 
• All non-natural (manufactured) resources that are 
used in the creation and production of other 
products 
• Example: equipment, machinery, transport and 
communication facilities, etc.  
• The reward for the services of capital is called 
interest.
Economic resources 
4. Entrepreneurship:  
• Refers a special type of human talent that helps to 
organize and manage other factors of production to 
produce goods and services and takes risk of making 
loses.  
• The reward for entrepreneurship is called profit. 
 Note:  
Scarcity is the fundamental economic problem.  It is natural 
phenomenon that refers to a state when a resource is available in 
a finite quantity. It is permanent.  
Shortage is a market phenomenon (which occurs whenever 
quantity demanded is greater than quantity supplied at the 
market price) and is temporary.
Economic resources 
 Entrepreneurs are individuals who: 
• Organize factors of production to produce goods 
and services. 
• Make basic business policy decisions. 
• Introduce new inventions and technologies into 
business practice. 
• Look for new business opportunities. 
• Take risks of making losses.
Factors of Production 
Land Labor Capital Enterprise 
Rent Profit Interest Wages 
INCOME 
Payments 
to factors 
of 
Productio
n
1.4.2. Choice 
 All economic questions and problems 
arise from scarcity.  
 Economics assumes people do not have 
the resources to satisfy all of their wants. 
 Therefore, we must make choices about 
how to allocate those resources. We 
make decisions about how to spend our 
money and use our time.
1.4.2. Choice 
 
• Scarcity → limited resource → limited 
output → we might not satisfy all our wants 
→ make choice → choice involves costs 
• In short, scarcity implies choice. Choice, in 
turn, implies cost.
1.4.3. Opportunity cost 
 In a world of scarcity, a decision to have 
more of one thing, at the same time, means 
a decision to have less of another thing.  
 Decisions involve tradeoffs. When you make 
a choice, you give up an opportunity to do 
something else. 
 The value of the next best alternative that 
must be sacrificed is, therefore, the 
opportunity cost of the decision.
1.4.3. Opportunity cost 
 In a world of scarcity, a decision to have more of 
one thing, at the same time, means a decision 
to have less of another thing. 
 The value of the next best alternative that must 
be sacrificed is, therefore, the opportunity cost 
of the decision. 
 Definition: Opportunity cost is the amount or 
value of the next best alternative that must be 
sacrificed (forgone) in order to obtain one more 
unit of a product.
1.4.4. The Production Possibilities Frontier 
            or Curve (PPF/ PPC) 
 PPF/PPC: is a graph that shows the 
combinations of output that the economy 
can possibly produce given the available 
factors of production and the available 
production technology
1.4.4. The Production Possibilities Frontier 
            or Curve (PPF/ PPC) 
 Consider an economy that produces only two 
goods—cars and computers.  
 Together, the car industry and the computer 
industry use all of the economy’s factors of 
production.  
 The production possibilities frontier is a graph that 
shows the various combinations of output—in this 
case, cars and computers— that the economy can 
possibly produce given the available factors of 
production and the available production 
technology that firms use to turn these factors into 
output.
1.4.4. The Production Possibilities Frontier 
            or Curve (PPF/ PPC) 
 To draw the PPF we need the following 
assumptions. 
1. The quantity as well as quality of economic 
resource available for use during the year is fixed.  
2. There are two broad classes of output to be 
produced over the year. 
3. The economy is operating at full employment and 
is achieving full production (efficiency). 
4. Technology does not change during the year.  
5. Some inputs are better adapted to the production 
of one good than to the production of the other 
(specialization).
Examples 
Eg. 1. constant opportunity cost 
 
 
 
Eg. 2. Increasing marginal opportunity cost
Examples 
• Suppose a hypothetical economy produces food and computer given its 
limited resources and available technology
Examples 
The production possibility frontier (PPF)
The production possibility frontier (PPF) 
The PPF describes four important concepts: 
• Scarcity: the society cannot have unlimited amount of outputs even if it 
employs all of its resources and utilizes them in the best possible way. 
• Choice: any movement along the curve indicates the change in choice. 
• Efficiency: all points on the PPF are efficient 
• Opportunity cost: when the economy produces on the PPF, production of 
more of one good requires sacrificing some of another product which is 
reflected by the downward sloping PPF.  
– Law of increasing opportunity cost: This law states that as we produce more 
and more of a product, the opportunity cost per unit of the additional output 
increases. This makes the shape of the PPF concave to the origin.
PPF & OC 
• Calculating opportunity cost: 
 
 
 
 
Say the economy is initially operating at point B,  
What is the opportunity cost of producing one more unit of computer? 
 
Solution: Moving from production alternative B to C we have: 
    𝑂𝐶 =  320−420
1000−500 = −100
500 = 0.2 
 
    The economy gives up 0.2 metric tons of food per computer.
Economic Growth and the PPF 
 • Economic growth or an increase in the total output level 
occurs when one or both of the following conditions occur. 
– Increase in the quantity or/and quality of economic resources 
– Advances in technology 
• Economic growth is represented by outward shift of the PPF.
Asymmetric growth and the PPF 
  An economy can grow because of an increase in productivity 
in one sector of the economy. For example, an improvement 
in technology applied to either food or computer would be 
illustrated by a shift of the PPF along the Y- axis or X-axis.
Basic economic questions 
 The fundamental economic problem leads to three important 
questions related to the allocation of resources. 
1. What to Produce? - the problem of allocation of resources.  
2. How to Produce? - the problem of choice of technique.  
3. For Whom to Produce? - the problem of distribution of 
national product.
What to Produce? 
 Economies cannot produce everything, so they must decide 
what to produce and in what quantities. 
 The economy must make choices such as  
 consumption goods versus capital goods,  
 civil goods versus military goods, and  
 necessity goods versus luxury goods. 
 Generally, the final choice of any economy is a combination of 
the various types of goods but the exact nature of the 
combination depends upon the specific circumstances and 
objectives of the economy.
How to Produce?  
 Once an economy has chosen what to produce , the economy 
must decide how to produce them. 
 choosing between alternative methods or techniques of 
production.  
 For example, cotton cloth can be produced with hand 
looms, power looms, or automatic looms.  
 Similarly, wheat can be grown with primitive tools and 
manual labor, or with modern machinery and little labor.
How to Produce?  
 Broadly speaking, the various techniques of 
production can be classified into two groups: 
1. labour-intensive techniques ,and  
2. capital-intensive techniques 
 The choice between different techniques depends on 
the available supplies of different factors of 
production and their relative prices. 
 Making good choices is essential for making the best 
possible use of limited resources to produce 
maximum amounts of goods and services.
For Whom to Produce? 
 This problem is also known as the problem of distribution of 
national product. 
 It relates to how a material product is to be distributed among 
the members of a society. 
 The economy must decide, for example, whether to produce 
for the benefit of the few rich people or for the large number 
of poor people. 
 An economy that wants to benefit the maximum number of 
persons would first try to produce the necessities of the 
whole population and then to proceed to the production of 
luxury goods.
Activity 
In 2019, 28% of Japan's population was aged 65 years and over; 
by 2050, this figure is estimated at 38%. Total population is also 
projected to fall from 125m in 2019 to 100m in 2050. Suggest the 
likely effect of these changes on 
a) what to produce 
b) how to produce 
c) For whom to produce.
Economic systems 
 The way a society tries to answer the above fundamental 
questions is summarized by a concept known as economic 
system. 
 An economic system is a set of organizational and institutional 
arrangements established to answer the basic economic 
questions. 
 Three types of economic system based on resource allocation 
mechanisms / ownership of means of production:  
 Capitalism/Free market economy/laissez faire 
 Command/Socialistic/Planned economy  
 Mixed economy
Capitalist economy 
 In this economic system,  
 all means of production are privately owned,  
 and production takes place at the initiative of individual 
private entrepreneurs who work mainly for private profit.  
 Government intervention in the economy is minimal. 
 resource allocation decisions are largely driven by the market 
mechanism, whereby individuals and firms take these 
decisions without government intervention. 
 resources are allocated by the forces of demand and supply 
through the price mechanism
How the price mechanism works 
.
Role of the government in a market economy 
. 
The market economy
Role of the government in a market economy 
 In principle, the government should have no direct role in 
the workings of the market economy and should not 
interfere in the operation of the price mechanism. 
 As long as the price mechanism is working efficiently, the 
government’s role is to watch what is happening and 
only intervene when the price mechanism does not 
provide the best allocation of resources. 
 When the price mechanism does not work efficiently, the 
market ‘fails’.
Role of the government in a market economy 
 Examples of market failure are 
  where the government provides goods such as healthcare 
which would be underprovided, fire services which would not 
be provided at all,  
 and where it seeks to regulate situations to prevent  firms using 
their power to control the market for excessive gain. 
 The true market economy is in certain respects an ideal. 
 No actual economy operates as a pure market economy. 
 Hong Kong SAR provides an interesting case of a near-perfect 
example of a market economy. All businesses are privately 
owned and Hong Kong’s bus, rapid transit rail service (MTR) and 
road tunnels are operated by private companies.
Features of Capitalistic Economy 
1. The right to private property 
2. Freedom of choice by consumers 
3. Productive activity is guided by the motive of profit-making 
and self-interest 
4. Competition among economic agents prevail  
5. All basic economic problems are solved through the market 
or price mechanism 
6. Minor role of government 
7. Inequalities of income 
8. Existence of negative externalities
Capitalist Economy  
Advantage 
• Flexibility/adaptability 
• Decentralized economic power 
• Increase in per-capita income 
and standard of living 
• Diversified types of consumer 
goods and services 
• Growth of entrepreneurship 
• Optimum utilization of 
productive resources 
• High rate of capital formation 
 
 
 
Disadvantage 
• Merit goods are under-
provided / demerit goods 
are overprovided. Eg. Junk 
food 
• Unbalanced economic 
activity 
• Inequality of income 
• Exploitation of labor 
• Negative externalities 
• Excessive market power
Command economy 
 Command economy is also known as socialistic economy. 
 In this economic system,  
 The economic institutions that are engaged in 
production and distribution are owned and controlled 
by the state.,  
 the government has a central role in all decisions that are 
made. 
 The choices in terms of what to produce, how to produce 
and for whom to produce are all centralized. 
 Unlike the market economy, the preferences of consumers 
and manufacturing organizations in a planned economy 
are controlled centrally.
Main Features of Command Economy 
1. Collective ownership: All means of production are owned by the 
society as a whole, and there is no right to private property. 
2. Central economic planning: Planning for resource allocation is 
performed by the controlling authority according to given socio-
economic goals. 
3. Strong government role: Government has complete control over 
all economic activities. 
4. Maximum social welfare: Command economy aims at maximizing 
social welfare and does not allow the exploitation of labor. 
5. Relative equality of incomes: Private property does not exist in a 
command economy, the profit motive is absent, and there are no 
opportunities for accumulation of wealth. All these factors lead to 
greater equality in income distribution, in comparison with 
capitalism.
Command economy 
Advantage 
• Absence of wasteful 
competition 
• Balanced economic growth 
• Elimination of private 
monopolies and inequalities 
• Controls labor exploitation 
and negative externalities 
 
Disadvantage 
• Absence of automatic price 
determination 
• Absence of incentives for 
hard work and efficiency 
• Lack of economic freedom 
• Red-tape
Mixed economy 
 Incorporates some features of both capitalist & command economy 
 Co-existence of public and private sectors 
 Economic welfare where public sector tries to remove regional 
imbalances, provides large employment opportunities and seeks 
economic welfare through its price policy 
 Economic planning to achieve co-ordinated rapid economic 
development, making use of both the private and the public sector. 
 Price mechanism
Mixed market systems
Mixed economy 
Advantages 
• Private property, profit 
motive and price 
mechanism 
• Adequate freedom 
• Rapid and planned 
economic development 
• Social welfare and fewer 
economic inequalities 
 
Disadvantages 
• Ineffectiveness and 
inefficiency 
• Economic fluctuations 
• Corruption and black 
markets
Discussion questions 
• What are examples of the most well-known 
countries with market/command/mixed 
economies? 
 
• What are? How have different societies that 
you know about attempted to answer the 
three basic economic questions?
Decision making units and the circular flow model 
Agents  Who is?  Decisions /roles  
1.Household One person or more who live 
under one roof and make 
joint financial decisions 
- Selling of their resources 
- Buying of goods and 
services 
2. Firm Production unit that uses 
economic resources to 
produce goods and 
services 
- Buying of economic 
resource 
- Selling of their products 
3. Government An organization that has legal 
and political power to control 
or influence households, firms 
and markets 
- Provide public goods and 
services 
- Create enabling business 
environment 
- Regulation, law and order  
 Decision making units
Decision making units and the circular flow model 
 Markets  
 
• Product market: it is a market where goods and services are 
transacted/ exchanged. That is, a market where households 
and governments buy goods and services from business firms. 
 
• Factor market (input market): it is a market where economic 
units transact/exchange factors of production (inputs). In this 
market, owners of resources (households) sell their resources 
to business firms and governments.
Circular-flow of the economy
Circular-flow of the economy
• EXERCISES (multiple choice and essay)